Urtext Volume V: Psychotherapy:
Purpose, Process and Practice
TTAABBLLEE O
OFF CCO
ONNTTEENNTTSS
1. AN INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOTHERAPY....................................................... 1
2. THE PURPOSE OF PSYCHOTHERAPY ............................................................... 1
A. Introduction.............................................................................................. 1
3. THE PROCESS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY ............................................................... 3
A. Introduction.............................................................................................. 3
B. The Limits on Psychotherapy................................................................... 4
C. The Place of Religion in Psychotherapy .................................................. 6
D. The Role of the Psychotherapist .............................................................. 9
E. The Process of Illness............................................................................. 10
F. The Process of Healing........................................................................... 13
G. The Definition of Healing...................................................................... 16
H. The Ideal Patient-Therapist Relationship............................................... 18
4. THE PRACTICE OF PSYCHOTHERAPY........................................................... 22
A. The Selection of Patients........................................................................ 22
B. Is Psychotherapy a Profession?.............................................................. 23
C. The Question of Payment....................................................................... 27
PROOF COPY
1757
V‐iv
PROOF COPY
1758
V‐1
Urtext Volume V: Psychotherapy:
Purpose, Process and Practice
1. AN INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOTHERAPY
P 1 A 1. Psychotherapy is the only form of therapy there is. Since
only the mind can be sick, only the mind can be healed. Only the
mind is in need of healing. This does not appear to be the case, for
the manifestations of this world seem real indeed. Psychotherapy is
necessary so that an individual1 can begin to question his reality.
Sometimes he is able to start to open his mind without formal help,
but even then it is always some change in his perception of
interpersonal relationships that enables him to do so. Sometimes he
needs a more structured, extended relationship with an ʺofficialʺ
therapist. Either way, the task is the same; the patient must be
helped to change his mind about the ʺrealityʺ of illusions.
2. THE PURPOSE OF PSYCHOTHERAPY
A. Introduction
P 2 A 1. Very simply, the purpose of psychotherapy is to remove the
blocks to truth. Its aim is to aid the patient in abandoning his fixed
delusional system, and to begin to reconsider the spurious cause
and effect relationships on which it rests. No‐one in this world
escapes fear, but everyone can reconsider its causes and learn to
evaluate them correctly. God has given everyone a Teacher Whose
wisdom and help far exceed whatever contributions an earthly
1 The Urtext manuscript has “an individual can begin to question their reality.” FIP keeps that reading.
Grammar requires that “an individual question his reality” or “individuals question their reality.”
When this was written in the mid-1970s the modern habit of using “their” when “his” or “her” would be
correct in order to achieve “gender-neutral language” had not come into vogue. The Notes has the
abbreviation indiv. which could be either plural or singular and it clearly has the glyph for “their”
rather than “his” four words later. Just before indiv. the Notes has a letter or glyph, possibly the glyph
for “an” crossed out with a dash above it, that dash often being the glyph for “the” but also sometimes
other things. That could be intended as “the individual” and might originally have been “an individual.”
However it could also just be noise with the intended meaning simply being “individuals” and that is
the only option which keeps the subject plural to fit with the subsequent unambiguous “their.”
PROOF COPY
1759
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐2
therapist can provide. Yet there are times and situations in which
the2 patient‐therapist relationship becomes the means through
which He offers His greater gifts to both.
P 2 A 2. What better3 purpose could any relationship have than to
invite the Holy Spirit to enter into it and give it His Own great gift
of rejoicing? What higher goal could there be for anyone than to
learn to call upon God and hear His Answer? And what more
transcendent aim can there be than to recall the Way, the Truth and
the Life,4 and to remember God? To help in this is the proper
purpose of psychotherapy. Could anything be holier? For
psychotherapy, correctly understood, teaches forgiveness and helps
the patient to recognize and accept it. And in his healing is the
therapist forgiven with him. P(2)
P 2 A 3. Everyone who needs help, regardless of the form of his
distress, is attacking himself, and his peace of mind is suffering in
consequence. These tendencies are often described as ʺself‐
destructive,ʺ and the patient often regards them in that way himself.
What he does not realize and needs to learn is that this ʺself,ʺ which
can attack and be attacked as well, is a concept he made up.
Further, he cherishes it, defends it, and is sometimes even willing to
ʺsacrificeʺ his ʺlifeʺ on its behalf. For he regards it as himself. This
self he sees as being acted on, reacting to external forces as they
demand, and helpless in5 the power of the world.
P 2 A 4. Psychotherapy, then, must restore to his awareness the
ability to make his own decisions. He must become willing to
reverse his thinking, and to understand that what he thought
projected its effects on him were made by his projections on the
world. The world he sees does therefore not exist. Until this is at
least in part accepted, the patient cannot see himself as really
2 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “the” to “an earthly.” That is not present in the Notes.
3 The Notes has “greater” rather than “better.”
4 Urtext manuscript has “Light”, handwritten mark-up corrects this Biblical quote to “Life”. This is also
the reading in the Notes. John 14:6 Jesus said to him, “I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one
comes to the Father except through Me.”
5 FIP replaces “in” with “midst.” The Notes reads “in.”
PROOF COPY
1760
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐3
capable of making decisions. And he will fight against his freedom
because he thinks that it is slavery.
P 2 A 5. The patient need not think of truth as God in order to make
progress in salvation. But he must begin to separate truth from
illusion, recognizing that they are not the same, and becoming
increasingly willing to see illusions as illusions6 and to accept the
truth as true. His Teacher will take him on from there, as far as he is
ready to go. Psychotherapy can only save him time. The Holy
Spirit uses time as He thinks best, and He is never wrong.
Psychotherapy under His direction is one of the means He uses to
save time, and to prepare additional teachers for His work. There is
no end to the help that He begins and He directs. By whatever
routes He chooses, all psychotherapy leads to God in the end. But
that is up to Him. We are all His psychotherapists, for He would
have us all be healed in Him. P(3)
3. THE PROCESS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY
A. Introduction
P 3 A 1. Psychotherapy is a process that changes the view of the self.
At best this ʺnewʺ self is a more beneficent self‐concept, but
psychotherapy can hardly be expected to establish reality. That is
not its function. If it can make way for reality, it has achieved its
ultimate success. Its whole function, in the end, is to help the
patient deal with one fundamental error; the belief that anger brings
him something he really wants, and that by justifying attack he is
protecting himself. To whatever extent he comes to realize that this
is mistaken,7 to that extent is he truly saved.
P 3 A 2. Patients do not enter the therapeutic relationship with this
goal in mind. On the contrary, such concepts mean little to them, or
they would not need help. Their aim is to be able to retain their self‐
concept exactly as it is, but without the suffering that it entails.
6 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “illusions” with “false.” The Notes has “illusions.”
7 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “mistaken” to “error.” The Notes omits the word entirely,
reading “to whatever extent he comes to realize this, to that extent he is truly saved.”
PROOF COPY
1761
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐4
Their whole equilibrium rests on the insane belief that this is
possible. And because to the sane mind it is so clearly impossible,
what they seek is magic. In illusions the impossible is easily
accomplished, but only at the cost of making illusions true. The
patient has already paid this price. Now he wants a ʺbetterʺ illusion.
P 3 A 3. At the beginning, then, the patientʹs goal and the therapistʹs
are at variance. The therapist as well as the patient may cherish
false self‐concepts, but their respective perceptions of
ʺimprovementʺ still must differ. The patient hopes to learn how to
get the changes he wants without changing his self‐concept to any
significant extent. He hopes, in fact, to stabilize it sufficiently to
include within it the magical powers he seeks in psychotherapy. He
wants to make the vulnerable invulnerable and the finite limitless.
The self he sees is his god, and he seeks only to serve it better.
P 3 A 4. Regardless of how advanced8 the therapist himself may be,
he must want to change the patientʹs self‐concept in some way that
he believes is real. The task of therapy is one of reconciling these
differences. Hopefully, both will learn to give up their original
goals, for it is only in relationships that salvation can be found. At
the beginning, it is inevitable that patients and therapists alike
accept unrealistic goals not completely free of magical overtones.
P(4) They are finally given up in the minds of both.
B. The Limits on Psychotherapy
P 3 B 1. Yet the ideal outcome is rarely achieved. But psychotherapy9
begins with the realization that healing is of the mind, and in
psychotherapy those have come together who10 believe this. It may
be they will not get much further, for no‐one learns beyond his own
readiness. Yet levels of readiness change, and when therapist or
patient has reached the next one, there will be a relationship held
out to them that meets the changing need. Perhaps they will come
8 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “advanced” to “sincere.” The Notes has “advanced.”
9 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “But psychotherapy” with “Therapy.” The Notes has “But
therapy.”
10 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “already.” The Notes doesn’t.
PROOF COPY
1762
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐5
together again and advance in the same relationship, making it
holier. Or perhaps each of them will enter into another
commitment. Be assured of this; each will progress. Retrogression
is temporary. The overall direction is one of progress toward the
truth.
P 3 B 2. Psychotherapy itself cannot be creative. This is one of the
errors which the ego fosters; that it is capable of true change, and
therefore of true creativity. When we speak of ʺthe saving illusionʺ
or ʺthe final dream,ʺ this is not what we mean, but here is the egoʹs
last defense. ʺResistanceʺ is its way of looking at things; its
interpretation of “progress”11 and “growth.”12 These interpretations
will be wrong of necessity, because they are delusional. The
“changes”13 the ego seeks to make are not really changes. They are
but deeper shadows, or perhaps different cloud patterns. Yet what
is made of nothingness cannot be called new or different. Illusions
are illusions; truth is truth.
P 3 B 3. Resistance as defined here14 can be characteristic of a
therapist as well as of a patient. Either way, it sets a limit on
psychotherapy because it restricts its aims. Nor can the Holy Spirit
fight against the intrusions of the ego on the therapeutic process.
But He will wait, and His patience is infinite. His goal is wholly
undivided always. Whatever resolutions patient and therapist reach
in connection with their own divergent goals, they cannot become
completely reconciled as one until they join with His. Only then is
all conflict over, for only then can there be certainty. P(5)
P 3 B 4. Ideally, psychotherapy is a series of holy encounters in which
brothers meet to bless each other and to receive the peace of God.
And this will one day come to pass for every ʺpatientʺ on the face of
this earth, for who except a patient could possibly have come here?
The therapist is only a somewhat more specialized Teacher of God.
He learns through teaching, and the more advanced he is the more
11 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete the quotation marks. They are present in the Notes.
12 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete the quotation marks. They are present in the Notes.
13 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete the quotation marks. They are present in the Notes.
14 Handwritten mark-up adds the word “here” which is not in the Urtext manuscript nor the Notes.
PROOF COPY
1763
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐6
he teaches and the more he learns. But whatever stage he is in, there
are patients who need him just that way. They cannot take more
than he can give for now. Yet they15 both will find sanity at last.
C. The Place of Religion in Psychotherapy16
P 3 C 1. To be a Teacher of God, it is not necessary to be religious or
even to believe in God to any recognizable extent. It is necessary,
however, to teach forgiveness rather than condemnation. Even in
this, complete consistency is not required, for one who has17
achieved that point can18 teach salvation completely, within an
instant and without a word. Yet he who has learned all things does
not need a teacher, and the healed have no need for a therapist.
Relationships are still the Temple19 of the Holy Spirit,20 and they will
be made perfect in time and restored to Eternity.21
P 3 C 2. Formal religion has no place in psychotherapy, but it also has
no real place in religion. In this world, there is an astonishing
tendency to join contradictory words into one term without
perceiving the contradiction at all. The attempt to formalize religion
is so obviously an ego attempt to reconcile the irreconcilable that it
hardly requires elaboration here. Religion is experience;
psychotherapy is experience. At the highest levels they become one.
Neither is truth itself, but both can lead to truth. What can be
necessary to find truth, which remains perfectly obvious, but to
remove the seeming obstacles to true awareness? P(6)
15 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete “they.” The word is present in the Notes.
16 This heading is originally typed at the end of the paragraph; mark-up suggests moving it, as we have
done. However, in the Notes it also occurs at the end of paragraph P 3 C 1, which would make that
paragraph P 3 B 5. It appears from the context that moving the section break is warranted, as this
paragraph introduces the topic of the following section.
17 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “has” with “had,” making the sentence shift from present to
past tense half way through, a most curious alteration. In the Notes it is “has.”
18 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “can” with “could.” In the Notes it is “can.”
19 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change this to lower case, but in the Notes it is upper case “Temple.”
20 1 Corinthians 6:19 Or do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit who is in
you, whom you have from God, and you are not your own? 1 Corinthians 3:16 Do you not know that
you are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?
21 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “Eternity” to lower case, but in the Notes it is upper case.
PROOF COPY
1764
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐7
P 3 C 3. No‐one who learns to forgive can fail to remember God.
Forgiveness, then, is all that need be taught, because it is all that
need be learned. All blocks to the remembrance of God are forms of
unforgiveness, and nothing else. This is never apparent to the
patient, and only rarely so to the therapist. The world has
marshalled22 all its forces against this one awareness, for in it lies the
ending of the world and all it stands for.
P 3 C 4. Yet it is not the awareness of God that constitutes a
reasonable goal for psychotherapy. This will come when
psychotherapy is complete, for where there is forgiveness truth
must come. It would be unfair indeed if belief in God were
necessary to psychotherapeutic success. Nor is belief in God a really
meaningful concept, for God can be but known. Belief implies that
unbelief is possible, but knowledge of God has no true opposite.
Not to know God is to have no knowledge, and it is to this that all
unforgiveness leads. And without knowledge one can have only
belief.
P 3 C 5. Different teaching aids appeal to different people. Some
forms of religion have nothing to do with God, and some forms of
psychotherapy have nothing to do with healing. Yet if pupil and
teacher join in sharing one goal, God will enter into their
relationship because He has been invited to come in. In the same
way, a union of purpose between patient and therapist restores the
place of God to ascendance, first through Christʹs vision and then
through the memory of God Himself. The process of psychotherapy
is the return to sanity. Teacher and pupil, therapist and patient, are
all insane or they would not be here. Together they can find a
pathway out, for no‐one will find sanity alone. P(7)
P 3 C 6. If healing is an invitation to God to enter into His Kingdom,
what difference does it make how the invitation is written? Does
the paper matter, or the ink, or the pen? Or is it he who writes that
gives the invitation? God comes to those who would restore His
22 Urtext manuscript spells it “martialed”, FIP spells it “marshaled.” Some dictionaries prefer
“marshalled” which is the spelling in the Notes.
PROOF COPY
1765
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐8
world, for they have found the way to call to Him. If any two are
joined, He must be there.23 It does not matter what their purpose is,
but they must share it wholly to succeed. It is impossible to share a
goal not blessed by Christ, for what is unseen through His eyes is
too fragmented to be meaningful.
P 3 C 7. As true religion heals, so must true psychotherapy be
religious. But both have many forms, because no true24 teacher uses
one approach to every pupil. On the contrary, he listens patiently to
each one, and lets him formulate his own curriculum; not the
curriculumʹs goal, but how he can best reach the aim it sets for him.
Perhaps the teacher does not think of God as part of teaching.
Perhaps the psychotherapist does not understand that healing
comes from God. They can succeed where many who believe they
have found God will fail.
P 3 C 8. What must the teacher do to ensure learning? What must the
therapist do to bring healing about? Only one thing; the same
requirement salvation asks of everyone. Each one must share one
goal with someone else, and in so doing, lose all sense of separate
interests. Only by doing this is it possible to transcend the narrow
boundaries the ego would impose upon the self. Only by doing this
can teacher and pupil, therapist and patient, you and I, accept
Atonement and learn to give it as it was received.
P 3 C 9. Communion is impossible alone. No‐one who stands apart
can receive Christʹs vision. It is held out to him, but he cannot hold
out his hand to receive it. Let him be still and recognize his
brotherʹs need is his own.25 And let him then meet his brotherʹs
need as his and see that they are met as one, for such they are. What
is religion but an aid in helping him to see that this is so? And what
is psychotherapy except a help in just this same direction? It is the
23 Matthew 18:20 “For where two or three are gathered together in My name, I am there in the midst of
them.”
24 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “true” with “good.” The Notes has “true.”
25 Psalm 46:10 “Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted
in the earth!”
PROOF COPY
1766
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐9
goal that makes these processes the same, for they are one in
purpose and must thus be one in means. P(8)
D. The Role of the Psychotherapist
P 3 D 1. The psychotherapist is a leader in the sense that he walks
slightly ahead of the patient, and helps him to avoid a few of the
pitfalls along the road by seeing them first. Ideally, he is also a
follower, for One should walk ahead of him to give him light to see.
Without this One, both will merely stumble blindly on to nowhere.
It is, however, impossible that this One be wholly absent if the goal
is healing. He may, however, not be recognized. And so the little
light that can be then accepted is all there is to light the way to truth.
P 3 D 2. Healing is limited by the limitations of the psychotherapist,
as it is limited by those of the patient. The aim of the process,
therefore, is to transcend these limits. Neither can do this alone, but
when they join, the potentiality for transcending all limitations has
been given them. Now the extent of their success depends on how
much of this potentiality they are willing to use. The willingness
may come from either one at the beginning, and as the other shares
it, it will grow. Progress becomes a matter of decision; it can reach
almost to Heaven or go no further than a step or two from hell.
P 3 D 3. It is quite possible for psychotherapy26 to seem to fail. It is
even possible for the result to look like retrogression. But in the end
there must be some success. One asks for help; another hears and
tries to answer in the form of help. This is the formula for salvation,
and must heal. Divided goals alone can interfere with perfect
healing. One wholly egoless therapist could heal the world without
a word, merely by being there. No‐one need see him or talk to him
or even know of his existence. His simple Presence is enough to
heal.
26 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace the originally typed “the psychotherapist” with
“psychotherapy.” While the Notes reading is slightly ambiguous, “psychotherapy” appears as the most
probable reading.
PROOF COPY
1767
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐10
P 3 D 4. The ideal therapist is one with Christ. But healing is a
process, not a fact. The therapist cannot progress without the
patient, and the patient cannot be ready to receive the Christ or he
could not be sick. In a sense, the egoless psychotherapist is an
abstraction that stands at the end of the process of healing, too
advanced to believe in sickness and too near to God to keep his feet
on earth. Now he can help through those in need of help, for thus
he carries out the plan established for salvation. P(9) The
psychotherapist becomes his patient, working through other
patients to express his thoughts as he receives them from the Mind
of Christ.
E. The Process of Illness
P 3 E 1. As all therapy is psychotherapy, so all illness is mental
illness. It is a judgment on the Son of God, and judgment is a
mental activity. Judgment is a decision, made again and again,
against creation and its Creator. It is a decision to perceive the
universe as you would have created it. It is a decision that truth can
lie and must be lies. What, then, can illness be except an expression
of sorrow and of guilt? And who could weep but for his innocence?
P 3 E 2. Once Godʹs Son is seen as guilty, illness becomes inevitable.
It has been asked for and will be received.27 And all who ask for
illness have now condemned themselves to seek for remedies that
cannot help, because their faith is in the illness and not in salvation.
There can be nothing that a change of mind cannot effect, for all
external things are only shadows of a decision already made.
Change the decision, and how can its shadow be unchanged?
Illness can be but guiltʹs shadow, grotesque and ugly since it mimics
deformity. If a deformity is seen as real, what could its shadow be
except deformed?28
27 Matthew 7:7 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened
to you.”
28 The Urtext manuscript originally has “the form” here. Handwritten mark-up and FIP change this to
“deformed” which restores the reading to that found in the Notes.
PROOF COPY
1768
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐11
P 3 E 3. The descent into hell follows step by step in an inevitable
course, once the decision that guilt is real has been made. Sickness
and death and misery now stalk the earth in unrelenting waves,
sometimes together and sometimes in grim succession. Yet all these
things, however real they seem, are but illusions. Who could have
faith in them once this is realized? And who could not have faith in
them until he realizes this? Healing is therapy or correction, and we
have said already and will say again, all therapy is psychotherapy.
To heal the sick is but to bring this realization to them.
P 3 E 4. The word ʺcureʺ has come into disrepute among the more
ʺrespectableʺ therapists of the world, and justly so. For not one of
them can cure, and not one of them understands healing. At
worst,29 they but make the body real in their own minds, and having
done so, seek for magic by which to heal the ills with which their
minds endow it. P(10) How could such a process cure? It is
ridiculous from start to finish. Yet having started, it must finish
thus. It is as if God were the devil and must be found in evil. How
could love be there? And how could sickness cure? Are not these
both one question?
P 3 E 5. At best, and the word is perhaps questionable here, the
ʺhealersʺ of the world may recognize the mind as the source of
illness. But their error lies in the belief that it can cure itself. This
has some merit in a world where ʺdegrees of errorʺ is a meaningful
concept. Yet must their cures remain temporary, or another illness
rise30 instead, for death has not been overcome until the meaning of
love is understood. And who can understand this without the Word
of God, given by Him to the Holy Spirit as His gift to you?
P 3 E 6. Illness of any kind may be defined as the result of a view of
the self as weak, vulnerable, evil and endangered, and thus in need
of constant defense. Yet if such were really the self, defense would
be impossible. Therefore, the defenses sought for must be magical.
29 Urtext manuscript has “worse.” FIP corrects it to “worst” as we do which restores the reading to that
found in the Notes.
30 Urtext manuscript has “lies,” handwritten mark-up and FIP correct this to “rise” which is also the
reading in the Notes.
PROOF COPY
1769
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐12
They must overcome all limits perceived in the self, at the same time
making a new self‐concept into which they31 cannot return. In a
word, error is accepted as real and dealt with by illusions. Truth
being brought to illusions, reality now becomes a threat and is
perceived as evil. Love becomes feared because reality is love. Thus
is the circle closed against the ʺinroadsʺ of salvation.
P 3 E 7. Illness is therefore a mistake and needs correction. And as
we have already emphasized before,32 correction cannot be achieved
by first establishing the ʺrightnessʺ of the mistake and then
overlooking it. If illness is real it cannot be overlooked in truth, for33
to overlook reality is insanity. Yet that is magicʹs purpose; to make
illusions true through false perception. This cannot heal, for it
opposes truth. Perhaps an illusion of health is substituted for a little
while, but not for long. Fear cannot long be hidden by illusions, for
it is part of them. It will escape and take another form, being the
source of all illusions. P(11)
P 3 E 8. Sickness is insanity because all sickness is mental illness, and
in it there are no degrees. One of the illusions by which sickness is
perceived as real is the belief that illness varies in intensity; that the
degree of threat differs according to the form it takes. Herein lies
the basis of all errors,34 for all of them are but attempts to
compromise by seeing just a little bit of hell. This is a mockery so
alien to God that it must be forever inconceivable. But the insane
believe it because they are insane.
P 3 E 9. A madman will defend his own illusions because in them he
sees his own salvation. Thus, he will attack the one who tries to
save him from them, believing that he is attacking him. This curious
circle of attack‐defense is one of the most difficult problems with
which the psychotherapist must deal. In fact, this is his central task;
31 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “they” with “the old one.” The Notes also has “they.”
32 FIP and handwritten mark-up delete “before.” The word “before” is in the Notes.
33 In the Urtext manuscript “for to overlook” is “but to overlook.” Handwritten mark-up and FIP
replace “but” with “for” which restores the reading in the Notes.
34 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change the singular “error” to the plural “errors.” The Notes has the
same reading as the Urtext: “error.”
PROOF COPY
1770
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐13
the core of psychotherapy. The therapist is seen as one who is
attacking the patientʹs most cherished possession; his picture of
himself. And since this picture has become the patientʹs security as
he perceives it, the therapist cannot but be seen as a real source of
danger, to be attacked and even killed.
P 3 E 10. The psychotherapist, then, has a tremendous responsibility.
He must meet attack without attack, and therefore without defense.
It is his task to demonstrate that defenses are not necessary, and that
defenselessness is strength. This must be his teaching, if his lesson
is to be that sanity is safe. It cannot be too strongly emphasized that
the insane believe that sanity is threat. This is the corollary of the
“original sin”; the belief that guilt is real and fully justified. It is
therefore the psychotherapist’s function to teach that guilt, being
unreal, cannot be justified. But neither is it safe. And thus it must
remain unwanted as well as unreal.
P 3 E 11. Salvation’s single doctrine is the goal of all therapy. Relieve
the mind of the insane burden of guilt it carries so wearily, and
healing is accomplished. The body is not cured. It is merely
recognized as what it is. Seen rightly, its purpose can be
understood. What is the need for sickness then? Given this single
shift, all else will follow. There is no need for complicated change.
There is no need for long analyses and wearying discussions and
pursuits. The truth is simple, being one for all. P(12)
F. The Process of Healing
P 3 F 1. While truth is simple, it must still be taught to those who
have already lost their way in endless mazes of complexity. This is
the great illusion. In its wake comes the inevitable belief that, to be
safe, one must control the unknown. This strange belief relies on
certain steps which never reach to consciousness. First, it is ushered
in by the belief that there are forces to be overcome to be alive at all.
And next, it seems as if these forces can be held at bay only by an
inflated sense of self that holds in darkness what is truly felt, and
seeks to raise illusions to the light.
PROOF COPY
1771
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐14
P 3 F 2. Let us remember that the ones who come to us for help are
bitterly afraid. What they believe will help can only harm; what
they believe will harm alone can help. Progress becomes impossible
until the patient is persuaded to reverse his twisted way of looking
at the world; his twisted way of looking at himself. The truth is
simple. Yet it must be taught to those who think it will endanger
them. It must be taught to those who will attack because they feel
endangered, and to those who need the lesson of defenselessness
above all else, to show them what is strength.
P 3 F 3. If this world were ideal, there could perhaps be ideal therapy.
And yet it would be useless in an ideal state. We speak of ideal
teaching in a world in which the perfect teacher could not long
remain; the perfect psychotherapist is but a glimmer of a thought
not yet conceived. But still we speak of what can yet be done in
helping the insane within the bounds of the attainable. While they
are sick, they can and must be helped. No more than that is asked
of psychotherapy; no less than all he has to give is worthy of the
therapist. For God Himself holds out his brother as his Savior35
from the world.
P 3 F 4. Healing is holy. Nothing in the world is holier than helping
one who asks for help. And two come very close to God in this
attempt, however limited, however lacking in sincerity. Where two
have joined for healing, God is there. And He has guaranteed that
He will hear and answer them in truth. They can be sure that
healing is a process He directs, because it is according to His Will.
We have His Word to guide us, as we try to help our brothers. Let
us not forget that we are helpless of ourselves, and lean upon a
strength beyond our little scope for what to teach as well as what to
learn.36 P(13)
35 FIP removes the capital on “Savior” which is present in the Urtext and the Notes.
36 John 5:19 Then Jesus answered and said to them, “Most assuredly, I say to you, the Son can do
nothing of Himself, but what He sees the Father do; for whatever He does, the Son also does in like
manner.”
John 5:30 “I can of Myself do nothing. As I hear, I judge; and My judgment is righteous, because I do
not seek My own will but the will of the Father who sent Me.”
PROOF COPY
1772
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐15
P 3 F 5. A brother seeking aid can bring us gifts beyond the heights
perceived in any dream. He offers us salvation, for he comes to us
as Christ and Savior. What he asks is asked by God through him.
And what we do for him becomes the gift we give to37 God. The
sacred calling of Godʹs holy Son for help in his perceived distress
can be but answered by his Father. Yet He needs a voice through
which to speak His holy Word; a hand to reach His Son and touch
his heart. In such a process, who could not be healed? This holy
interaction is the plan of God Himself, by which His Son is saved.
P 3 F 6. For two have joined. And now Godʹs promises are kept by
Him. The limits laid on both the patient and the therapist will count
as nothing, for the healing has begun. What man38 must start his39
Father will complete. For He has never asked for more than just the
smallest willingness, the least advance, the tiniest of whispers of His
Name. To ask for help, whatever form it takes, is but to call on Him.
And He will send His Answer through the therapist who best can
serve His Son in all his present needs. Perhaps the answer does not
seem to be a gift from Heaven. It may even seem to be a worsening
and not a help. Yet let the outcome not be judged by us.
P 3 F 7. Somewhere all gifts of God must be received. In time no
effort can be made in vain. It is not our perfection that is asked in
our attempts to heal. We are deceived already, if we think there is a
need of healing. And the truth will come to us only through one
who seems to share our dream of sickness. Let us help him to
forgive himself for all the trespasses with which he would condemn
himself without a cause.40 His healing is our own. And as we see
the sinlessness41 in him come shining through the veil of guilt that
37 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “to” which was not originally typed, restoring the Notes reading.
38 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “man” with “they.” The Notes has “man.”
39 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “his” with “their.” The Notes has “his.”
40 Matthew 6:12-15 “And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us. And
bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one. For if ye forgive men their trespasses,
your heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses.”
41 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace the originally typed “sinless” with “sinlessness.” This is also
the reading in the Notes.
PROOF COPY
1773
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐16
shrouds the Son of God, we will behold in him the Face42 of Christ,
and understand that it is but our own.
P 3 F 8. Let us stand silently before Godʹs Will, and do what It43 has
chosen that we do. There is one way alone by which we come to
where all dreams began. And it is there that we will lay them down,
to come away in peace forever. Hear a brother call for help and
answer him. It will be God to Whom you answer, for you called on
Him. There is no other way to hear His Voice. There is no other
way to seek44 His Son. There is no other way to find45 your Self.
Holy is healing, for the Son of God returns to Heaven through its
kind embrace. For healing tells him, in the Voice of46 God, that all47
his sins have been forgiven him.48 P(14)
G. The Definition of Healing
P 3 G 1. The process of psychotherapy, then, can be defined simply as
forgiveness, for no healing can be anything else. The unforgiving
are sick, believing they are unforgiven. The hanging‐on to guilt, its
hugging‐close and sheltering, its loving protection and alert defense,
‐‐ all this is but the grim refusal to forgive. ʺGod may not enter
hereʺ the sick repeat, over and over, while they mourn their loss and
yet rejoice in it. Healing occurs as a patient begins to hear the dirge
he sings, and questions its validity. Until he hears it, he cannot
understand that it is he who sings it to himself. To hear it is the first
step in recovery. To question it must then become his choice.
42 Handwritten mark-up and FIP make “Face” lower case. In the Notes it is capitalized.
43 Handwritten mark-up and FIP make “It” lower case. In the Notes it is capitalized.
44 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “find” with “seek” In this and the next sentence, “seek” and
“find” are switched. In the Notes it is originally written “find His Son” and “seek your Self” but these
are crossed out and switched. The exact same handwritten corrections occur in the Urtext manuscript,
suggesting they might have been made at the same time. We’ve kept it here as originally written in the
Notes and typed in the Urtext manuscript.
45 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “seek” with “find.” (see previous footnote)
46 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “of” with “for.” In the Notes it is “of.”
47 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “all” restoring the passage to the reading found in the Notes.
48 Our copy of the Urtext manuscript is missing the last word, “him” which is present in the Notes. FIP
includes it.
PROOF COPY
1774
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐17
P 3 G 2. There is a tendency, and it is very strong, to hear this song of
death49 an instant, and then dismiss it uncorrected. These fleeting
awarenesses represent the many opportunities given us literally ʺto
change our tune.ʺ The sound of healing can be heard instead. But
first the willingness to question the ʺtruthʺ of the song of
condemnation must arise. The strange distortions woven
inextricably into the self‐concept, itself but a “pseudo‐creation,”50
make this ugly sound seem truly beautiful. ʺThe rhythm of the
universe,ʺ ʺthe herald angelʹs song,ʺ all these and more are heard
instead of loud discordant shrieks.
P 3 G 3. The ear translates; it does not hear. The eye reproduces; it
does not see. Their task is to make agreeable whatever is called on,
however disagreeable it may be. They answer the decisions of the
mind, reproducing its desires and translating them into acceptable
and pleasant forms. Sometimes the thought behind the form breaks
through, but only very briefly, and the mind grows fearful and
begins to doubt its sanity. Yet it will not permit its slaves to change
the forms they look upon; the sounds they hear. These are its
ʺremediesʺ; its ʺsafeguardsʺ from insanity.
P 3 G 4. These testimonies which the senses bring have but one
purpose; to justify attack and thus keep unforgiveness unrecognized
for what it is. Seen undisguised it is intolerable. Without protection
it could not endure. Here is all sickness cherished, but without the
recognition that this is so. For when an unforgiveness is not
recognized, the form it takes seems to be something else. And now
it is the ʺsomething elseʺ that seems to terrify. But it is not the
ʺsomething elseʺ that can be healed. It is not sick, and P(15) needs no
remedy. To concentrate your healing efforts here is but futility.
Who can cure what cannot be sick and make it well?
P 3 G 5. Sickness takes many forms, and so does unforgiveness. The
forms of one but reproduce the forms of the other, for they are the
same illusion. So closely is one translated into the other, that a
49 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “only” which is not present in the Notes.
50 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete quotation marks which are present in the Notes.
PROOF COPY
1775
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐18
careful study of the form a sickness takes will point quite clearly to
the form of unforgiveness that it represents. Yet seeing this will not
effect a cure. That is achieved by only one recognition; that only
forgiveness heals an unforgiveness, and only an unforgiveness can
possibly give rise to sickness of any kind.
P 3 G 6. This realization is the final goal of psychotherapy. How is it
reached? The therapist sees in the patient all that he has not
forgiven in himself, and is thus given another chance to look at it,
open it to re‐evaluation and forgive it. When this occurs, he sees his
sins as gone into a past that is no longer here. Until he does this, he
must think of evil as besetting him here and now. The patient is his
screen for the projection of his sins, enabling him to let them go. Let
him retain one spot of sin in what he looks upon, and his release is
partial and will not be sure.
P 3 G 7. No‐one is healed alone. This is the joyous song salvation
sings to all who hear its Voice. This statement cannot be too often
remembered by all who see themselves as therapists. Their patients
can but be seen as the bringers of forgiveness, for it is they who
come to demonstrate their sinlessness to eyes that still believe that
sin is there to look upon. Yet will the proof of sinlessness, seen in
the patient and accepted in the therapist, offer the mind of both a
covenant in which they meet and join and are as one. P(16)
H. The Ideal Patient‐Therapist Relationship
P 3 H 1. Who, then, is the therapist, and who is the patient? In the
end, everyone is both. He who needs healing must heal.
“Physician, heal thyself.”51 Who else is there to heal? And who else
is in need of healing? Each patient who comes to a therapist offers
him a chance to heal himself. He is therefore his therapist. And
every therapist must learn to heal from each patient who comes to
him. He thus becomes his patient. God does not know of separation.
51 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete quotation marks. This paragraph has not been located in the
Notes.
Luke 4:23 He said to them, “You will surely say this proverb to Me, ‘Physician, heal yourself!
Whatever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in Your country.’”
PROOF COPY
1776
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐19
What He knows is only that He has one Son. His knowledge is
reflected in the ideal patient‐therapist relationship. God comes to
him who calls, and in Him he52 recognizes Himself.
P 3 H 2. Think carefully, teacher and therapist, for whom you pray,
and who is in need of healing. For therapy is prayer, and healing is
its aim and its result. What is prayer except the joining of minds in
a relationship which Christ can enter? This is His home, into which
psychotherapy invites Him. What is symptom cure, when another
is always there to choose? But once Christ enters in, what choice is
there except to have Him stay? There is no need for more than this,
for it is everything. Healing is here, and happiness and peace.
These are the ʺsymptomsʺ of the ideal patient‐therapist relationship,
replacing those with which the patient came to ask for help.
P 3 H 3. The process that takes place in this relationship is actually
one in which the therapist in his heart tells the patient that all his
sins have been forgiven him, along with his own. What could be the
difference between healing and forgiveness? Only Christ forgives,
knowing His sinlessness. His vision heals perception and sickness
disappears. Nor will it return again, once its cause has been
removed. This, however, needs the help of a very advanced
therapist, capable of joining with the patient in a holy relationship in
which all sense of separation finally is overcome.
P 3 H 4. For this, one thing and one thing only is required: The
therapist in no way confuses himself with God. All ʺunhealed
healersʺ make this fundamental confusion in one form or another,
because they must regard themselves as self‐created rather than
God‐created. This confusion is rarely if ever in awareness, or the
unhealed P(17) healer would instantly become a Teacher of God,
devoting his life to the function of true healing. Before he reached
this point, he thought he was in charge of the therapeutic process
and was therefore responsible for its outcome. His patientʹs
52 The capitals on Him and He are reversed in the Urtext manuscript. This paragraph has not been
located in the Notes.
PROOF COPY
1777
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐20
failures53 thus became his own mistakes,54 and guilt became the
cover, dark and strong, for what should be the Holiness of Christ.
Guilt is inevitable in those who use their judgment in making their
decisions. Guilt is impossible in those through whom the Holy
Spirit speaks.
P 3 H 5. The passing of guilt is the true aim of therapy and the
obvious aim of forgiveness. In this their oneness can be clearly seen.
Yet who could experience the end of guilt who feels responsible for
his brother in the role of guide for him? Such a function
presupposes a knowledge that no‐one here can have; a certainty of
past, present and future, and of all the effects that may occur in
them. Only from this omniscient point of view would such a role be
possible. Yet no perception is omniscient, nor is the tiny self of one
alone against the universe able to assume he has such wisdom
except in madness. That many therapists are mad is obvious. No
unhealed healer can be wholly sane.
P 3 H 6. Yet it is as insane not to accept a function God has given you
as to invent one He has not. The advanced therapist in no way can
ever doubt the power that is in him. Nor does he doubt its Source.
He understands all power in earth and Heaven belongs to him
because of who he is.55 And he is this because of his Creator, Whose
Love is in him and Who cannot fail. Think what this means; he has
the gifts of God Himself to give away. His patients are Godʹs saints,
who call upon his sanctity to make it theirs. And as he gives it to
them, they behold Christʹs shining face as it looks back at them.
P 3 H 7. The insane, thinking they are God, are not afraid to offer
weakness to the Son of God.56 But what they see in him because of
53 Handwritten mark-up and FIP have “errors” in place of “failures.” In the Notes there are two words
crossed out, which aren’t legible, and the word “failures” is written in between the lines to replace
them.
54 Handwritten mark-up and FIP have “failures” in place of “mistakes.” The Notes has “mistakes.”
55 Matthew 28:18 And Jesus came and spoke to them, saying, “All authority has been given to Me in
heaven and on earth.”
56 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “Son of God” to “God’s Son.” In the Notes it is “Son of God”
but there is a curious mark between “of” which occurs at the end of line N 3:36:2 and “God” which
occurs at the beginning of line N 3:36:3 which may be a question mark indicating scribal uncertainty.
PROOF COPY
1778
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐21
this they fear indeed. The unhealed healer cannot but be fearful of
his patients, and suspect them of the treachery he sees in him. He
tries to heal, and thus at times he may. But he will not succeed
except to some extent and for a little while. He does not see the
Christ in him who calls. P(18) What answer can he give to one who
seems to be a stranger; alien to the truth and poor in wisdom,
without the god who must be given him? Behold your God in him,
for what you see will be your Answer.
P 3 H 8. Think what the joining of two brothers really means. And
then forget the world and all its little triumphs and its dreams of
death. The same are one, and nothing now can be remembered of
the world of guilt. The room becomes a temple, and the street a
stream of stardust brushing57 lightly past all sickly dreams. Healing
is done, for what is perfect needs no healing, and what remains to be
forgiven where there is no sin?
P 3 H 9. Be thankful, therapist, that you can see such things as this, if
you but understand your proper role. But if you fail in that,58 you
have denied that God created you, and so you will not know you
are His Son.59 Who is your brother60 now? What saint can come to
take you home with him? You lost the way. And can you now
expect to see in him an answer that you have refused to give? Heal
and be healed. There is no other choice of pathways that can ever
lead to peace. Oh let your patient in, for he has come to you from
God. Is not his holiness enough to wake your memory of Him? P(19)
57 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “stardust brushing” with “stars that brush.” The Notes has
“stardust brushing.”
58 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “that” to “this” restoring the material to the form found in the
Notes.
59 “Son” is not capitalized in the Urtext manuscript. It is in the Notes and the capitalization is
appropriate for a person of the Trinity. The omission of capitalization here is deemed a typo.
60 Originally typed “bother” … this is a typo Thetford reports frequently making in his autobiographical
speech. This appears to be clearly a typo. It is “brother” in the Notes and FIP.
PROOF COPY
1779
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐22
4. THE PRACTICE OF PSYCHOTHERAPY
A. The Selection of Patients
P 4 A 1. Everyone who is sent to you is a patient of yours. This does
not mean that you select him, nor that you choose the kind of
“treatment” that is suitable. But it does mean that no‐one comes to
you by mistake. There are no errors in Godʹs plan. It would be an
error, however, to assume that you know what to offer everyone
who comes. This is not up to you to decide. There is a tendency to
assume that you are being called on constantly to make sacrifices of
yourself for those who come. This could hardly be true. To demand
sacrifice of yourself is to demand a sacrifice of God, and He knows
nothing of sacrifice. Who could ask of Perfection that He be
imperfect?
P 4 A 2. Who, then, decides what each brother needs? Surely not
you, who do not yet recognize who he is who asks. There is
Something in him that will tell you, if you listen. And that is the
answer; listen. Do not demand, do not decide, do not sacrifice.
Listen. What you hear is true. Would God send His Son to you and
not be sure you recognize his needs? Think what God is telling you;
He needs your voice to speak for Him. Could anything be holier?
Or a greater gift to you? Would you rather choose who would be
god, or hear the Voice of Him Who is God in you?
P 4 A 3. Your patients need not be physically present for you to serve
them in the Name of God. This may be hard to remember, but God
will not have His gifts to you limited to the few you actually see.
You can see others as well, for61 seeing is not limited to the bodyʹs
eyes. Some do not need your physical presence. They need you as
much, and perhaps even more, at the instant they are sent. You will
recognize them in whatever way can be most helpful to both of you.
It does not matter how they come. They will be sent in whatever
form is most helpful; a name, a thought, a picture, an idea, or
61 The Urtext manuscript has “but” typed. Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “but” to “for” which
restores the Notes reading.
PROOF COPY
1780
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐23
perhaps just a feeling of reaching out to someone somewhere. The
joining is in the hands of the Holy Spirit. It cannot fail to be
accomplished. P(20)
P 4 A 4. A holy therapist, an advanced Teacher of God, never forgets
one thing; he did not make the curriculum of salvation, nor did he
establish his part in it. He understands that his part is necessary to
the whole, and that through it he will recognize the whole when his
part is complete. Meanwhile he must learn, and his patients are the
means sent to him for his learning. What could he be but grateful
for them and to them? They come bearing God. Would he refuse
this Gift for a pebble, or would he close the door on the savior of the
world to let in a ghost? Let him not betray the Son of God. Who
calls on him is far beyond his understanding. Yet would he not
rejoice that he can answer, when only thus will he be able to hear
the call and understand that it is his? P(21)
B. Is Psychotherapy a Profession?
P 4 B 1. Strictly speaking the answer is no. How could a separate
profession be one in which everyone is engaged? And how could
any limits be laid on an62 interaction in which everyone is both
patient and therapist in every relationship into63 which he enters?
Yet practically speaking, it can still be said that there are those who
devote themselves primarily to healing of one sort or another as
their chief function. And it is to them that a large number of others64
turn for help. That, in effect, is the practice of therapy. These65 are
therefore ʺofficiallyʺ helpers. They are devoted to certain kinds of
needs in their professional activities, although they may be far more
able teachers outside of them. These people need no special rules, of
62 Urtext manuscript has “a kind of” typed above the line, and crossed out by hand. It is not present in
the Notes.
63 The Urtext manuscript has “in” here but the Notes indicates “into” which is more appropriate.
64 Urtext manuscript has “people” typed above the line, and crossed out by hand. The Notes also has
two curious cross-outs in this line offering two alternate readings. See N 3:41:14-15.
65 Urtext manuscript has “people” typed above the line, and crossed out by hand. The word “people” is
in the Notes.
PROOF COPY
1781
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐24
course, but they may be called upon to use66 special applications of
the general principles of healing.
P 4 B 2. First, the professional therapist is in an excellent position to
demonstrate that there is no order of difficulty in healing. For this,
however, he needs special training, because the curriculum by
which he became a therapist probably taught him little or nothing
about the real principles of healing. In fact, it probably tried to
teach67 him how to make healing impossible. Most of the worldʹs
training follows68 a curriculum in judgment, with the aim of making
the therapist a judge.
P 4 B 3. Even this the Holy Spirit can use, and will use, given the
slightest invitation. The unhealed healer may be arrogant, selfish,
unconcerned, and actually dishonest. He may be disinterested and
unconcerned with69 healing as his major goal. Yet something
happened to him, however slight it may have been, when he chose
to be a healer, however misguided the direction he may have
chosen. That ʺsomethingʺ is enough. Sooner or later that something
will rise in awareness70 and grow; a patient will touch his heart, and
the therapist71 will silently ask him for help. He has himself found a
therapist. He has asked the Holy Spirit to enter the relationship and
heal it. He has accepted the Atonement for himself. P(22)
P 4 B 4. God is said to have looked on all He created and pronounced
it good.72 No, He declared it perfect, and so it was. And since His
66 Originally typed “give,” Urtext manuscript mark-up suggests “offer” and finally “use” as seen here.
The Notes has “use.”
67 Handwritten mark-up and FIP have “taught” instead of “tried to teach.” The Notes has “tried to
teach.”
68 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “training programs follow” with “training follows” which
would more closely resemble the Notes which has “training follow” which has an obvious grammar
problem. It would need to be “training follows” which is what the mark-up indicates.
69 Handwritten mark-up and FIP have “may be uninterested in.” The Notes has “may really be act
unconcerned with healing as his major goal.” The word really is written between the lines and appears
to be an afterthought. The word “act” is crossed out.
70 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “in awareness.” FIP omits it. The Notes reads “sooner or later that
it will rise and grow; a patient will …”
71 Urtext manuscript has “he,” handwritten mark-up and FIP substitute “therapist.” In the Notes it is
“he.”
72 Genesis 1:31 Then God saw everything that He had made, and indeed it was very good. So the
evening and the morning were the sixth day.
PROOF COPY
1782
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐25
creations do not change and last forever, so it is now. Yet neither a
perfect therapist nor a perfect patient can possibly exist. Both must
have denied their perfection, for their very need for each other
implies a sense of lack. A one‐to‐one relationship is not one
Relationship. Yet it is the means of return; the way God chose for
the return of His Son. In that strange dream a strange correction
must enter, for only that is the call to awake. And what else should
therapy be? Awake and be glad, for all your sins have been
forgiven you. This is the only message that any two should ever
give each other.
P 4 B 5. Something good must come from every meeting of patient
and therapist. And that good is saved for both, against the day
when they can recognize that only that was real in their relationship.
At that moment it is73 returned to them, blessed by the Holy Spirit as
a gift from their Creator as a sign of His Love. For the therapeutic
relationship must become like the relationship of the Father and the
Son. There is no other, for there is nothing else. The therapists of
this world do not expect this outcome, and many of their patients
would not74 be able to accept help from them if they did. Yet no
therapist really sets the goal for the relationships of which he is a
part. His understanding begins with recognizing this, and then goes
on from there.
P 4 B 6. It is in the instant that the therapist forgets to judge the
patient that healing occurs. In some relationships this point is never
reached, although both patient and therapist may arrive at
different75 dreams in the process. Yet it will not be the same dream
for both of them, and so it is not the dream of forgiveness in which
both will someday wake. The good is saved; indeed is cherished.
73 Urtext manuscript has “it is” which is the same as the Notes. “The good” is handwritten in between
the lines. FIP preserves that editing change.
74 The word “not” is handwritten, it is not in the original Urtext manuscript. It is, however, present in
the Notes.
75 The Urtext manuscript has “may arrive at different dreams…” Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace
that with “may change their dreams.” The Notes has “may arrive at a different dream in the process.”
Also, the Notes appears to have initially said “the patient may arrive at a different dream in the process”
with strikeout and interlinear writing changing that to “both patient and therapist may arrive at a
different dream in the process.”
PROOF COPY
1783
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐26
But only little time is saved and76 the new dreams will lose their
temporary appeal and turn to dreams of fear, which is the content of
all dreams. Yet no patient can accept more than he is ready to
receive, and no therapist can offer more than he believes he has.
And so there is a place for all relationships in this world, and they
will bring as much good as each can accept and use. P(23)
P 4 B 7. Yet it is when judgment ceases that healing occurs, because
only then it can be understood that there is no order of difficulty in
healing. This is a necessary understanding for the healed healer.
He has learned that it is no harder to wake a brother from one
dream than from another. No professional therapist can hold this
understanding consistently in his mind, offering it to all who come
to him. There are some in this world who have come very close, but
they have not accepted the gift entirely in order to stay and let their
understanding remain on earth until the closing of time. They could
hardly be called professional therapists. They are the Saints of God.
They are the Saviors of the world. Their image remains, because
they have chosen that it be so. They take the place of other images,
and help with kindly dreams.
P 4 B 8. Once the professional therapist has realized that minds are
joined, he can also recognize that order of difficulty in healing is
meaningless. Yet well before he reaches this in time he can go
toward it. Many holy instants can be his along the way. A goal
marks the end of a journey, not the beginning, and as each goal is
reached another can be dimly seen ahead. Most professional
therapists are still at the very start of the beginning stage of the first
journey. Even those who have begun to understand what they must
do may still oppose the setting‐out. Yet all the laws of healing can
be theirs in just an instant. The journey is not long except in dreams.
76 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete “and” and begin a new sentence with “The”. The Notes has it as
the Urtext was originally typed.
PROOF COPY
1784
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐27
P 4 B 9. The professional therapist has one advantage that can save
enormous time if it is properly used. He has chosen a road on77
which there is great temptation to misuse his role. This enables him
to pass by many obstacles to peace quite quickly, if he escapes the
temptation to assume a function that has not been given him. To
understand there is no order of difficulty in healing, he must also
recognize the equality of himself and the patient. There is no
halfway point in this. Either they are equal or not. The attempts of
therapists to compromise in this respect are strange indeed. Some
utilize the relationship merely to collect bodies to worship at their
shrine, and this they regard as healing. P(24) Many patients, too,
consider this strange procedure as salvation. Yet at each meeting
there is One Who says, ʺMy brother, choose again.ʺ
P 4 B 10. Do not forget that any form of specialness must be
defended, and will be. The defenseless therapist has the strength of
God with him, but the defensive therapist has lost sight of the
Source of his salvation. He does not see and he does not hear. How,
then, can he teach? Because it is the Will of God that he take his
place in the plan for salvation. Because it is the Will of God that his
patients be helped to join with him there. Because his inability to
see and hear does not limit the Holy Spirit in any way. Except in
time. In time there can be a great lag between the offering and the
acceptance of healing. This is the veil across the Face of Christ. Yet
it can be but an illusion, because time does not exist and the Will of
God has always been exactly as it is. P(25)
C. The Question of Payment
P 4 C 1. No‐one can pay for therapy, for healing is of God and He
asks for nothing. It is, however, part of His plan that everything in
this world be used by the Holy Spirit to help in carrying out the
plan. Even an advanced therapist has some earthly needs while he
is here. Should he need money it will be given him, not in payment,
77 Urtext manuscript has “chosen a role on which.” handwritten mark-up changes that to “chosen a road
on which,” and then changes it again, with FIP to “chosen a road in which.” Temptations aren’t “in”
roads, but rather are “on” them, so we’re going with the second option. The Notes has “road on which.”
PROOF COPY
1785
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐28
but to help him better serve the plan. Money is not evil. It is
nothing. But no‐one here can live with no illusions, for he must yet
strive to have the last illusion be accepted by everyone everywhere.
He has a mighty part in this one purpose, for which he came. He
stays here but for this. And while he stays he will be given what he
needs to stay.
P 4 C 2. Only an unhealed healer could78 try to heal for money, and
he will not succeed to the extent to which he values it. Nor will he
find his healing in the process. There will be those of whom the
Holy Spirit asks some payment for His purpose. There will be those
from whom He does not ask. It should not be the therapist who
makes these decisions. There is a difference between payment and
cost. To give money where Godʹs plan allots it has no cost. To
withhold it from where it rightfully belongs has enormous cost. The
therapist who would do this loses the name of healer, for he could
never understand what healing is. He cannot give it, and so he does
not have it.
P 4 C 3. The therapists of this world are indeed useless to the worldʹs
salvation. They make demands, and so they cannot give. Patients
can pay only for the exchange of illusions. This, indeed, must
demand payment, and the cost is great. A ʺboughtʺ relationship
cannot offer the only gift whereby all healing is accomplished.
Forgiveness, the Holy Spiritʹs only dream, must have no cost. For if
it does, it merely crucifies Godʹs Son again. Can this be how he is
forgiven? Can this be how the dream of sin will end?
P 4 C 4. The “right to live”79 is something no‐one need fight for. It is
promised him, and guaranteed by God. Therefore it is a right the
therapist and patient share alike. P(26) If their relationship is to be
holy, whatever one needs is given by the other; whatever one lacks
the other supplies. Herein is the relationship made holy, for herein
both are healed. The therapist repays the patient in gratitude, as
does the patient repay him. There is no cost to either. But thanks
78 Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “would.” The Notes clearly has “could.”
79 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete quotation marks. They are present in the Notes.
PROOF COPY
1786
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐29
are due to both, for the release from long imprisonment and doubt.
Who would not be grateful for such a gift? Yet who could possibly
imagine that it could be bought?
P 4 C 5. It has well been80 said that to him who hath shall be given.81
Because he has, he can give. And because he gives, he shall be
given. This is the law of God, and not of the world. So it is with
Godʹs healers. They give because they have heard His Word and
understood
it. All that they need will thus be given them. But they will lose this
understanding unless they remember that all they have comes only
from God. If they believe they need anything from a brother, they
will recognize him as a brother no longer. And if they do this, a
light goes out even in Heaven. Where Godʹs Son turns against
himself, he can look only upon darkness. He has himself denied the
light, and cannot see.
P 4 C 6. One rule should always be observed: No‐one should be
turned away because he cannot pay. No‐one is sent by accident to
anyone. Relationships are always purposeful. Whatever their
purpose may have been before the Holy Spirit entered them, they
are always His potential temple82; the resting place of Christ and
home of God Himself. Whoever comes has been sent. Perhaps he
was sent to give his brother the money he needed. Both will be
blessed thereby. Perhaps he was sent to teach the therapist how
much he needs forgiveness, and how valueless is money in
comparison. Again will both be blessed. Only in terms of cost
could one have more. In sharing, everyone must gain a blessing
without cost.
80 Urtext manuscript has “be said.” Handwritten mark-up corrects this to “been said.” This corrects an
apparent typo and restores the reading found in the Notes.
81 Matthew 13:12 “For whoever has, to him more will be given, and he will have abundance; but
whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.”
82 1 Corinthians 3:16 Do you not know that you are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God
dwells in you?
1 Corinthians 6:19 Or do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit who is in you,
whom you have from God, and you are not your own?
PROOF COPY
1787
Volume V Psychotherapy
V‐30
P 4 C 7. This view of payment may well seem impractical, and in the
eyes of the world it would be so. Yet not one worldly thought is
really practical. How much is gained by striving for illusions? How
much is lost by throwing God away? And is it possible to do so?
Surely it is impractical to strive for nothing, and to attempt to do
what is impossible. Then stop a while, long enough to think of this:
P(27) You have perhaps been seeking for salvation without
recognizing where to look. Whoever asks your help can show you
where. What greater gift than this could you be given? What
greater gift is there that you would give?
P 4 C 8. Physician, healer, therapist, teacher, heal thyself.83 Many will
come to you carrying the gift of healing, if you so elect. The Holy
Spirit never refuses an invitation to enter and abide with you. He
will give you endless opportunities to open the door to your
salvation, for such is His function. He will also tell you exactly what
your function is in every circumstance and at all times. Whoever He
sends you will reach you, holding out his hand to his Friend. Let
the Christ in you bid him welcome, for that same Christ is in him as
well. Deny him entrance, and you have denied the Christ in you.
Remember the sorrowful story of the world, and the glad tidings84
of salvation. Remember the plan of God for the restoration of joy
and peace. And do not forget how very simple are the ways of God:
You were lost in the darkness of the world until you asked for light.
And then God sent His Son to give it to you.85
83 Luke 4:23 He said to them, “You will surely say this proverb to Me, "Physician, heal yourself!
Whatever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in Your country.”
84 Luke 1:19 And the angel answered and said to him, “I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of
God, and was sent to speak to you and bring you these glad tidings.”
85 Romans 8:3 For what the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God did by sending
His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, on account of sin: He condemned sin in the flesh,